RFC: Schema Coordinates (#746)
graphql/graphql-spec: rfcs/SchemaCoordinates.md

  ```json
  ["query", "searchBusinesses", 1, "owner", "name"]
  ```

  Note that here, the "path" is a serialized _response_ tree traversal, instead
  of describing the location of the field in the _schema_.

  Since "path" is already used in GraphQL nonclemanture to describe the location
  of a field in a response, we'll avoid overloading this term.

### Separator

This RFC proposes using "`.`" as the separator character between a type and
field. The following have also been proposed:

- `Foo::bar`
- `Foo#bar`
- `Foo->bar`
- `Foo~bar`
- `Foo:bar`

"`.`" is already used in the existing implementations of field coordinates, hence
the suggested usage in this RFC. However, we may wish to consider one of the
alternatives above, should this conflict with existing or planned language
features.

## 🤔 Drawbacks / Open questions

- https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/issues/735 discusses potential
  conflicts with the upcoming namespaces proposal - would like to seek clarity on
  this

- Should we specify an algorithm for doing the query -> set of schema
  coordinates? Or just hint/imply that this mapping theoretically exists? Is this
  out of scope?

> ### Answered quetsions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Answered questions
```

Author: good catch again, thanks!

# RFC: Schema Coordinates

**Proposed by:** [Mark Larah](https://twitter.com/mark_larah) - Yelp

This RFC proposes formalizing "Schema Coordinates" - a human readable syntax to

> uniquely identify a type, field, or field argument defined in a GraphQL Schema.

Reviewer 2: Should enum value coordinates be addressed by this RFC too? Similar to the use cases discussed for fields and field arguments, we (Salsify) have tooling to understand how clients are using enum values (in addition to fields and field arguments) to support schema evolution. It should fit in pretty well with the proposed dot syntax (e.g. `Direction.NORTH` refers the `NORTH` enum value in the `Direction` enum) so hopefully it's not a big lift.

Author: yep - makes sense! thanks for this, incorporated this into the selector grammar.

# RFC: Schema Coordinates

**Proposed by:** [Mark Larah](https://twitter.com/mark_larah) - Yelp

> This RFC proposes formalizing "Schema Coordinates" - a human readable syntax to
> uniquely identify a type, field, or field argument defined in a GraphQL Schema.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This RFC proposes formalizing "Schema Coordinates" - a human readable syntax to
uniquely identify a type, field, field argument, directive or directive argument defined in a GraphQL Schema.
```

Reviewer 4: or enum, as joel suggested

Also "type" is unclear whether that means specifically the formal output `type` or is a generic term that captures input types as well. Perhaps there's a broader category we could capture here rather than trying to list the specifics exhaustively?

Reviewer 3: "type" is a very broad term, the SDL `type Foo { ... }` is called an "object type" in most places. I think "type" is sufficient to cover enums (and scalars, input object types, unions, interfaces, tagged, etc), but yes "enum values" does need to be added :+1: I've edited the above.

This should be listed as a non-normative note in the GraphQL specification to
serve as an official reference for use by third party tooling.

## 📜 Problem Statement

> Third party GraphQL tooling and libraries may wish to refer to a field, or set of
> fields in a schema. Use cases include documentation, metrics and logging
> libraries.

Reviewer 3: GraphiQL isn't third party, and still wants to refer to this, so I've removed "Third party". Also made the intention broader.

```suggestion
GraphQL tooling and libraries may wish to refer to the various components of a GraphQL schema. Use cases include documentation, metrics and logging
libraries.
```

![](https://i.fluffy.cc/5Cz9cpwLVsH1FsSF9VPVLwXvwrGpNh7q.png)

_(Example shown from GraphiQL's documentation search tab)_

> There already exists a convention used by some third party libraries for writing
> out fields in a unique way for such purposes. However, there is no formal
> specification or name for this convention.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There already exists a convention used by some libraries and tools for writing
out fields in a unique way for such purposes. However, there is no formal
specification or name for this convention.
```

### Use cases

1. A GraphQL server wants to **log how often each field in the schema is
   requested**. This may be implemented by incrementing a counter by the name of
   the schema coordinate for each field executed in a request.

>    _Existing implementations: Yelp (internal), Facebook (internal)_

Reviewer 4: Shopify publicly via https://shopify.dev/concepts/about-apis/versioning/api-health.

Author: added, thanks!

1. GraphiQL and other playgrounds / documentation sites want to show a list of
   **search results** when a user searches for a type or field name. We can
   display a list of schema coordinates that match the search term. A schema
   coordinate can also be used in the hyperlink to form a permalink for
   documentation for a particular field.

   _Existing implementations: GraphiQL, Apollo Studio (see "Prior Art")_

1. A developer may want to perform **analytics** on all known
   [persisted queries][apq] - e.g. what are the most commonly used fields across

>    all documents. Schema selectors may be used as the index/lookup keys when

Reviewer: You entered the `Schema Coordinates` term but here jumped to `Schema selectors`.

Author: 😱 yikes yes I had "selectors" littered about everywhere! (maybe that's a signal that selectors is a better name?! :P)

Thanks! Fixed!

>    storing this information in the database.

Reviewer 3: In this use case, it may be useful to differentiate between `Query.forums` (all, unfiltered), `Query.forums(about:)` (filtered) and `Query.forums(about:,first:,after:)` (filtered, paginated). No change required, just noting because this adds weight to the desire to add more than one argument to a field, though I understand that this is not technically a "schema coordinate" at this point but instead a usage summary.

Author: ++ something like `Query.forums(about:,first:,after:)` sounds like a great use case / future syntax extension.

Going to close this for now as it looks like there's no change needed, but let's certainly bear this in mind for the future!

   _Existing implementations: Yelp (internal)_

   [apq]: https://www.apollographql.com/docs/apollo-server/performance/apq/

1. A **GitHub bot** may want to warn developers in a Pull Request comment
   whenever the schema diff contains a breaking change. Schema coordinates can be
   used to provide a list of which fields were broken.

   _Existing implementations: GraphQL Inspector (see "Prior Art")_

1. **GraphQL IDEs** (e.g. GraphiQL, GraphQL Playground, Apollo Studio) may wish
   to display the schema definition type of a node in a query when hovering over
   it.

   <details>
   <summary>Example</summary>
   ![](https://i.fluffy.cc/g78sJCjCJ0MsbNPhvgPXP46Kh9knBCKF.png)
   </details>

   Schema coordinates can be used to form the left hand side of this popover.

_Existing implementations: Apollo Studio (see "Prior Art")_

## 🚫 What this RFC does _not_ propose

- This does not cover "selectors" or "wildcard" syntax - e.g. `User.*`. _(See
  alternatives considered.)_
- There are **no proposed GraphQL language/syntax changes**
- There are **no proposed GraphQL runtime changes**
- [Schema coordinate non-goals](#-syntax-non-goals)

> ## ✨ Worked Examples

Reviewer 3: Above this, we really should list the proposed syntaxes concretely rather than extracting them from examples. Maybe something like:

```suggestion
## Proposed syntax

### `Type`

Refers to a named type (e.g. something represented by `__Type` in GraphQL introspection).

### `Type.field`

Refers to a named "field" on the named type. Not all types support this. For object types and interface types this is a normal field, for input objects this would be input fields, for future GraphQL types this will relate to their concept of a field if they have one (e.g. for the [proposed "tagged" type](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/733) it would refer to the "member field".

### `Type.field(argName:)`

Refers to a named argument on the named field of the named type.

### `@directive`

References the given named directive

### `@directive(argName:)`

References the named argument of the named directive.

## ✨ Worked Examples
```

Reviewer 3: (I'm not sure about "attribute", but couldn't think of a better word. Field isn't quite right because of enums.)

Author: Makes sense - thanks!

For example, consider the following schema:

```graphql
type Person {
  name: String
}

type Business {
  name: String
  owner: Person
}

type Query {
  searchBusinesses(name: String): [Business]
}
```

We can write the following list of Schema Coordinates:

- `Person` uniquely identifies the the "Person" type
- `Business` uniquely identifies the the "Business" type
- `Person.name` uniquely identifies the "name" field on the "Person" type
- `Business.name` uniquely identifies the "name" field on the "Business"
  type
- `Business.owner` uniquely identifies the "owner" field on the "Business" type
- `Query.searchBusinesses` uniquely identifies the "searchBusinesses" field on
  the "Query" type

> - `Query.searchBusinesses(name:)` uniquely identifies the "name" argument on the

Reviewer 4: I'm still not keen on this syntax for arguments. `Query.searchBusinesses.name` feels a bit more natural to me, and is less likely to be mistaken for an actual query fragment or something. But I don't have a compelling argument here, it's mostly just personal preference.

Reviewer 3: If we stick with this syntax we can extend it in future to reference a position in a GraphQL document; e.g.

```
Query.businesses:searchBusinesses(name:).owner:personByOwnerId.email
```

might refer to:

```graphql
{
  businesses: searchBusinesses(name: "Automotive") {
    id
    name
    owner: personByOwnerId {
      id
      name
      email # <<< HERE
    }
  }
}
```

Reviewer 3: Actually that's a poor example (probably you'd just say `businesses.owner.email`); but you could write something like the above expression and have it automatically expand to a similar GraphQL document, similar to how you can use CSS shortcuts to expand to DOM structure using emmet or similar.

Author: @eapache Happy to go either way! I'm pretty 50/50 on `Foo.bar.baz` vs `Foo.bar(baz:)`. How do we decide here? Toss a coin? Dance-off battle?

@benjie  On the topic of something like `Query.businesses:searchBusinesses(name:).owner:personByOwnerId.email`, just to clarify:
1) Schema coordinates are supposed to "uniquely identify a type". Given our use cases, it's ideal if there's no normalization that has to be done to get to the "simplest" schema coordinate for the same thing.
2) Tracing the path to a member of a query/document is kinda already a thing with [field paths](https://spec.graphql.org/June2018/#example-90475) (`"path": [ "hero", "heroFriends", 1, "name" ]`).

Perhaps it's possible one day we unify this syntax and expand schema coordinates to support nesting, but I'll gingerly suggest that this is out of scope for this particular RFC? (Worth bearing in mind for a future extension of this syntax tho, along with selecting multiple arguments)

Thoughts?

Reviewer 4: > Dance-off battle?

I'm in 😂 

Seriously though, I think it's probably something worth chatting about at the IRL working group meetings. There might be an obvious consensus there, and if not then we'll probably want to do a slightly more formal pros/cons writeup to justify making a final call (basically the process we're following for input unions, but not nearly so heavy).

> businesses.owner.email

Yeah, the schema-coordinates vs query-path vs result-path distinction is still a little weird... they're definitely distinct but they *feel* like they ought to be related somehow.

Case in point, in the Shopify example I shared above we're technically sharing a weird combination of coordinate and path. For use of deprecated fields we share the plain coordinate `Type.field` but for use of deprecated inputs we append the full input path (so not `InputType.field` but actually `Type.field.argument.inputFieldPath...`.

Author: ack! Ok leaving this open for now. I'll proceed with the `Foo.bar(baz:)` style just so we have something written down, but we'll make sure to talk about it next WG meeting. Happy to ctrl-f search and replace it all to `Foo.bar.baz` if that's where we land - should be an easy to change to make now that we're prepared for it.

I'll add this as an open question to the RFC.

Thanks!

Reviewer 3: > Perhaps it's possible one day we unify this syntax and expand schema coordinates to support nesting, but I'll gingerly suggest that this be out of scope for this particular RFC? (Worth bearing in mind for a future extension of this syntax tho, along with selecting multiple arguments)

100%; I was never suggesting adding this to this spec, more that we should make sure that the spec enables future innovation including using it for things _other than_ schema coordinates. To my mind the `(foo:)` syntax is more flexibile in this regard. For example, I can imagine referring to:

1. `Foo.bar(baz:.qux)`: the `qux` field of the input object referred to from the `baz` argument of the `bar` field on the `Foo` type.
2. `Foo.bar(baz:).qux`: the `qux` field on the return type of the `bar` field (with `baz:` argument) of the `Foo` type.
3. `Foo.bar.baz.qux`: the `qux` field of the return type of the `baz` field on the return type of the `bar` field on type `Foo`.

If we were to only use periods then all of these would come out the same as `Foo.bar.baz.qux`, and this ambiguity precludes this kind of reusal of the schema-coordinates syntax for this use case (which is outside the scope of the schema coordinates spec, for sure, but is still a potential use-case for the syntax).

Ultimately what I'm saying is I feel it would be a shame if the syntax could not be re-used outside of schema coordinates.

Reviewer 4: > `Foo.bar(baz:).qux`

I would rewrite this all-periods as `Foo.bar.quz`. I don't see why the argument is relevant if the thing you're trying to reference is the `qux` field. Assuming a well-formed query then you don't even need the argument to uniquely identify the path.

Reviewer 3: Sure, if we're using them as coordinates rather than doing Emmet-style auto-completion or some other use case someone has come up with. Even as simply coordinates though, 1 and 3 are still distinct yet would have the same representation with periods?

Imagine you had the following schema

```graphql
type Foo {
  bar(baz: BazInput): Bar
}

type Bar {
  baz(qux: Int): Baz
}

type Baz {
  qux: Int
}

input BazInput {
  qux: Int
}

type Query {
  foo: Foo
}
```

With periods you might write `Foo.bar.baz.qux`, and that could refer to (using argument syntax) `Foo.bar(baz:.qux)` (input field), `Foo.bar.baz(qux:)` (argument) or `Foo.bar.baz.qux` (field) - three very different things. GraphQL query language looks like the JSON it returns, it makes sense to me that schema coordinates should look like the GraphQL entities they represent.

Author: I've added a couple notes in the RFC about this syntax:

1. ```Should arguments look like `Foo.bar.baz` instead of `Foo.bar(baz:)`?``` (we'll discuss in a WG meeting)
2. As an RFC goal: `Schema coordinate syntax is open for extension in the future.` To @benjie (and other's) points, whilst we're not currently supporting fancy extended syntax as described, we could all imagine extending schema coordinate syntax to support multiple arguments, wildcards etc. So if we can do something now even just to give us more flexibility and wiggle room in the future, then that's probably a good thing.

Reviewer 3: Following yesterday's WG (and the thumbs up above) I believe that @eapache is happy to go ahead with the parenthesized syntax.

Additional note; I wrote `Foo.bar(baz:.qux)` above; but I think `Foo.bar(baz.qux:)` has better aesthetics.

Reviewer 5: Bit of a tangent (although it seems like using parens is resolved so it may be safe) - 

In the example of `Foo.bar(baz:).qux`, is the contents of the parens carrying useful information for the coordinates?  

Assuming arguments require parens, would `Foo.bar(baz:).qux` point to the same place as `Foo.bar.qux`?

Reviewer 6: Is it too late to add my opinion? I agree with @eapache the C struct.member notation is much better for several reasons. 
- 1. Exactly that, it is C style syntax so it comes naturally for many devs who work with C style languages such as php. 
- 2. A period is easier and quicker to type than (:). 
- 3. It is 3 non alpha numeric characters instead of 1, which makes a 3 byte difference AND requires a parser while the struct syntax could be implemented in C as a struct without parsing. 
 
This also makes a big difference in embedded and IOT systems which can benefit immensely from graph data structures if they are implemented efficiently. This could literally keep me from using graphQL in a project.

Lastly why call it coordinates? It doesn't have anything to do with position or am I missing something. This constant reinvention of terms in web frameworks has always been a major issue for newcomers. Things should be named for clarification and not because they sound fancy. It is not descriptive of it's purpose. It is used to identify just as it was described in the OP. So why not call it a Field Identifier? Field Descriptor? It may not sound hip or new but I know what it means.

If you go up to non GraphQL literate person you should be able to explain a query without having to explain what a "field coordinate" is after using the word. If you were to ask me to identify the coordinate in those queries I would think you are trolling me and I have been a web dev for 15+ years. I just asked my GF what the Descriptor was and she said "the name after the period". She is a English teacher and doesn't know what a div tag is.

Author: I've had some time to chew this over - given discussions last WG meeting, I'm personally pretty settled on `Foo.bar(baz:)`. That's the option I'm proposing in the RFC.

I've captured this discussion in the RFC here: https://github.com/magicmark/graphql-spec/blob/add_field_coordinates/rfcs/SchemaCoordinates.md#field-arguments

Please let me know if anyone feels I missed anything, or if there's more points to add (or existing points to contest!)

Thanks everyone who has helped so far in thinking through this :)

@excitedbox to answer some stuff:

1. On the topic of argument syntax, it is a bit of a tradeoff! I've tried to capture the reasoning in a [new section in the RFC](https://github.com/magicmark/graphql-spec/blob/add_field_coordinates/rfcs/SchemaCoordinates.md#field-arguments). I welcome your followup feedback!
2. For naming, I'll point again to the RFC, as there's [a whole section on this](https://github.com/magicmark/graphql-spec/blob/add_field_coordinates/rfcs/SchemaCoordinates.md#naming). I will say that in the last WG meeting, I literally bought up the point "schema coordinates sounds a bit fancy", but I think (1) ultimately it's a more accurate name than the alternatives I had, and (2) it's reusing prior art (graphql java already used the "coordinates" naming). If you have an alternate suggestion, I'd love to hear your thoughts.

Author: (I'm going to leave this conversation thread open till at least the next WG to make sure this discussion remains visible for folks)

- GraphiQL displays schema coordinates in its documentation search tab:

  ![](https://i.fluffy.cc/5Cz9cpwLVsH1FsSF9VPVLwXvwrGpNh7q.png)

- [GraphQL Inspector](https://github.com/kamilkisiela/graphql-inspector) (840
  stars) shows schema coordinates in its output:

  ![](https://i.imgur.com/HAf18rz.png)

- [Apollo Studio](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/studio/) shows schema
  coordinates when hovering over fields in a query:

  ![](https://i.fluffy.cc/g78sJCjCJ0MsbNPhvgPXP46Kh9knBCKF.png)

## 🥣 Document -> Schema Coordinate serialization

Use cases 3 and 5 above imply that a mapping from GraphQL query nodes to schema
coordinates is performed.

For example, consider the following schema:

```graphql
type Person {
  name: String
}

type Business {
  name: String
  owner: Person
}

type Query {
  searchBusiness(name: String): [Business]
}
```

And the following query:

```graphql
query {
  searchBusinesses(name: "El Greco Deli") {
    name
    owner {
      name
    }
  }
}
```

From the query above, we may calculate the following list of schema coordinates:

- `Query.searchBusinesses`
- `Business.name`
- `Business.owner`
- `Person.name`

> _`Query.searchBusinesses(name)` is also a valid member of the output set. The

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
_`Query.searchBusinesses(name:)` is also a valid member of the output set. The
```

  established terminology for this concept, and we also wish to describe more
  than just types on fields.

- **"Field Coordinates"**

  "Field Coordinates" is already understood and used by the popular
  [GraphQL Java](https://github.com/graphql-java/graphql-java) project.

  [Feedback in the August GraphQL Working Group meeting](https://youtu.be/FYF15RA9H3k?t=3786)
  hinted that since we're targeting also describing arguments, _field_
  coordinates might not be the right name. Hence "Schema Coordinates" is chosen
  instead, as a more generalized form of this.

- **"GraphQL Coordinates"**

  Similar to Field Coordinates/Schema Coordinates - however, "GraphQL
  Coordinates" is potentially ambiguous as to if it describes _schema_ members,
  _query/document_ members or response object members.

- **"Field path" / "GraphQL path"**

  [`path` exists as an attribute on `GraphQLResolveInfo`](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/blob/8f3d09b54260565/src/type/definition.js#L951).

  Given the following query:

  ```graphql
  query {
    searchBusinesses(name: "El Greco Deli") {
      name
      owner {
        name
      }
    }
  }
  ```

>   Person.name` in the response may as written as the following "field path":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `Person.name` in the response may as written as the following "field path":
```

  pass "wildcards" or "star syntax" to be able to select multiple schema
  elements. This implies multiple ways of _selecting_ a schema node.
  
  For example, `User.address` and `User.a*` might both resolve to `User.address`.
  But `User.a*` could also ambiguously refer to `User.age`.

  It's unclear how wildcard expansion would work with respect to field
  arguments\*, potentially violating the requirement of this schema to _uniquely_
  identify schema components.

  \* _(e.g. does `Query.getUser` also select all arguments on the `getUser`
  field? Who knows! A discussion for another time.)_

  A more general purpose schema selector language could be built on top of this
  spec - however, we'll consider this **out of scope** for now.

- **Directive applications**

  This spec does not support selecting applications of directive.
 
  For example:

  ```graphql
  directive @private(scope: String!) on FIELD

  type User {
      name: String
      reviewCount: Int
      friends: [User]
      email: String @private(scope: 'loggedIn')
  }
  ```

  You _can_ select the definition of the `private` directive and its arguments

>   (with `@private` and `@private(scope)` respectively), but you cannot select the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  (with `@private` and `@private(scope:)` respectively), but you cannot select the
```

  to an argument. The function parentheses and colons more strongly communicate
  "this is an argument!" than a second dot separator.

#### Decision

We are choosing `Query.rollDice(numDice:)` to optimize for **readability** and
**extensibility**.

Given our expected use cases, we assume Schema Coordinates will be _read_ more
often than they are _written_ (e.g. error messages in a stack trace from a
schema linting tool). Readers may be unfamiliar with its syntax. We want to
"hint" as much as possible the meaning of the coordinates in its syntax. We
think `(numDice:)` more clearly communicates that "numDice" is an argument, over
`.numDice`.

In addition, we want to be mindful of extensions to this syntax in the future.
Using dots only as a separator may overload the meaning of elements in schema
coordinates in the future. (If we capture new schema node types, or nested
paths.)

> We should make sure that the spec enables future innovation including using it
> for things other than schema coordinates. To my mind the (foo:) syntax is more
> flexible in this regard. For example, I can imagine referring to:
>

> > 1. `Foo.bar(baz:.qux)`: the qux field of the input object referred to from the
> >    baz argument of the bar field on the Foo type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> 1. `Foo.bar(baz.qux:)`: the qux field of the input object referred to from the
>    baz argument of the bar field on the Foo type.
```

Would retro-editing this to the slightly modified syntax I now propose be appropriate? I've edited the linked comment with a note.

  instead.

  If we _did_ want to support this, a syntax such as `User.email@private[0]`
  could work. (The indexing is necessary since [multiple applications of the same
  directive is allowed][multiple-directives], and each is considered unique.)

  [multiple-directives]: http://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Directives-Are-Unique-Per-Location

- **Union members**

  This spec does not support selecting members inside a union definition.

  For example:

  ```graphql
  type Breakfast {
    eggCount: Int
  }

  type Lunch {
    sandwichFilling: String
  }

  union Meal = Breakfast | Lunch
  ```

  You may select the `Meal` definition (as "`Meal`"), but you may **not** select
  members on `Meal` (e.g. `Meal.Breakfast` or `Meal.Lunch`).

  It is unclear what the use case for this would be, so we won't (yet?) support
  this. In such cases, consumers may select type members directly (e.g. `Lunch`).

## 🤔 Drawbacks / Open questions

- Should we specify an algorithm for doing the query -> set of schema
  coordinates? Or just hint/imply that this mapping theoretically exists? Is this
  out of scope?

### Answered questions

> - **Is this extensible enough?** The above issue discusses adding arguments as
>   part of this specification - we haven't touched on this here in order to keep
>   this RFC small, but we may wish to consider this in the future (e.g.
>   `Query.searchBusiness:name`).

Reviewer 3: Let's strikethrough this since the update below notes it's no longer relevant. Alternatively remove this bullet entirely.

```suggestion
- **Is this extensible enough?** ~~The above issue discusses adding arguments as
  part of this specification - we haven't touched on this here in order to keep
  this RFC small, but we may wish to consider this in the future (e.g.
  `Query.searchBusiness:name`).~~
```

Author: ack - it's under the sercion "Answered questions" which implies it's old news, but i'll just remove this point entirely as you suggest, since i guess it's superfluous as it's now explicitly now covered in the spec
